--- Page 69 ---
APPENDIX A
Style Analysis Summary
Figure A-1 summarizes the architecture characteristics scoring for
each of the architecture styles described in this report. One dot
means that the architecture characteristic is not well supported by
the architecture style, whereas five dots means it’s well supported by
that style.
This summary will help you determine which style might be best for
your situation. For example, if your primary architectural concern
is scalability, you can look across this chart and see that the event-
driven style, microservices style, and space-based style are probably
good architecture style choices. Similarly, if you choose the layered
architecture style for your application, you can refer to the chart
to see that deployment, performance, and scalability might be risk
areas in your architecture.
While this chart and report will help guide you in choosing the right
style, there is much more to consider when choosing an architecture
style. Y ou must analyze all aspects of your environment, including
infrastructure support, developer skill set, project budget, project
deadlines, and application size, to name a few. Choosing the right
architecture style is critical, because once an architecture is in place,
it is very hard (and expensive) to change.
65
--- Page 70 ---
Figure A-1. Architecture styles rating summary
66 | Appendix A: Style Analysis Summary
--- Page 71 ---
About the Author
Mark Richards  is an experienced, hands-on software architect
involved in the architecture, design, and implementation of
microservices architectures, service-oriented architectures, and dis‐
tributed systems in a variety of technologies. He has been in the
software industry since 1983 and has significant experience and
expertise in application, integration, and enterprise architecture.
Mark is the founder of DeveloperToArchitect.com, a free website
devoted to helping developers in the journey to becoming a software
architect.
In addition to hands-on consulting and training, Mark has auth‐
ored numerous technical books and videos, including the two lat‐
est books he coauthored, Fundamentals of Software Architecture
(O’Reilly) and Software Architecture: The Hard Parts  (O’Reilly).
Mark has spoken at hundreds of conferences and user groups
around the world on a variety of enterprise-related technical topics.
When he is not working, Mark can usually be found hiking in the
White Mountains or along the Appalachian Trail.
--- Page 72 ---
Learn from experts.  
Become one yourself.
Books | Live online courses   
Instant Answers | Virtual events 
Videos | Interactive learning
Get started at oreilly.com. 
©2022 O’Reilly Media, Inc. O’Reilly is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. | 175

