--- Page 5 ---
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
It’s all too common for developers to start coding an application
without a formal architecture in place. This practice usually results
in ill-defined components, creating what is commonly referred to
as a big ball of mud . These architectures are generally tightly cou‐
pled, brittle, difficult to change, and lack a clear vision or direction.
It’s also very difficult to determine the architectural characteristics
of applications lacking a well-defined architectural style. Does the
architecture scale? What are the performance characteristics of the
application? How easy is it to change the application or add new
features? How responsive is the architecture?
Architecture styles help define the basic characteristics and behavior
of an application. Some architecture styles naturally lend themselves
toward highly scalable systems, whereas other architecture styles
naturally lend themselves toward applications that allow develop‐
ers to respond quickly to change. Knowing the characteristics,
strengths, and weaknesses of each architecture style is necessary to
choose the one that meets your specific business needs and goals.
A lot has happened in software architecture since 2015 when the
first edition of this report was published. Both microservices and
event-driven architecture have gained in popularity, and develop‐
ers and architects have found new techniques, tools, and ways
of designing and implementing these architecture styles. Also, the
widespread use of domain-driven design has led to a better under‐
standing of how architectures are structurally partitioned, and how
that partitioning can impact the design and implementation of a
1
--- Page 6 ---
system. The second edition of the report addresses both of these
advances.
The second edition also includes other significant enhancements,
along with more information about the intersection of architecture
and data, and an expanded analysis section at the end of each chap‐
ter. These new sections provide you with better guidelines for when
to use (and not to use) each architecture presented in this report.
Another change you’ll notice in the second edition is the use of
the term architecture style rather than architecture pattern for the
architectures described in this report. This distinction helps alleviate
some of the confusion surrounding the differences between, say,
event-driven architecture—an architecture style—and something
like CQRS (Command Query Responsibility Segregation), which is
an architecture pattern.
An architecture style , such as the ones presented in this report,
describe the macro structure of a system. Architecture patterns, on
the other hand, describe reusable structural building block patterns
that can be used within each of the architecture styles to solve a par‐
ticular problem. Take, for example, the well known CQRS pattern,
which describes the structural separation between read and write
operations to a database or eventing system (for example, separate
services and databases for read operations and write operations).
This architecture pattern could be applied to any of the architecture
styles described in this report to optimize database queries and
updates.
Architecture patterns, in turn, differ from design patterns (such as
the Builder design pattern) in that an architecture pattern impacts
the structural aspect of a system, whereas a design pattern impacts
how the source code  is designed. For example, you can use the
Builder design pattern as a way to implement the CQRS architecture
pattern, and then use the CQRS pattern as a building block within
a microservices architecture. Figure 1-1 shows this hierarchical rela‐
tionship among the three terms and how they interrelate with each
other to build software systems.
2 | Chapter 1: Introduction
--- Page 7 ---
Figure 1-1. Architecture styles can be composed of architecture pat‐
terns, which in turn can be composed of design patterns
Design patterns and architecture patterns are typically combined to
form a complete solution. Architecture styles act in the same way—
they can also be combined when building software solutions to form
a complete solution. Hybrid architecture styles are common in the
real world because not every architecture style can solve every busi‐
ness problem. Common architecture style hybrids include event-
driven microservices (events between microservices), space-based
microservices (processing units implemented as microservices), and
even an event-driven microkernel architecture (events between the
core system and remote plug-in components). Although forming
hybrids is a common practice, it is vital to understand individ‐
ual architecture styles and their corresponding strengths and weak‐
nesses before combining them.
The goal of this updated second edition report remains the same as
the first edition: to help senior developers and architects understand
some of the more common architecture styles, how they work, when
to use them, and when not to use them. This will help to not only
expand your knowledge of architecture, but will also help you make
the right architecture choice for your systems.
Introduction | 3
--- Page 8 ---

