--- Page 19 ---
CHAPTER 3
Layered Architecture
The most common architecture style is the layered architecture,
otherwise known as the n-tier architecture. This style is the de facto
standard for most applications because it aligns with traditional IT
team structures where teams are organized by technical domains
(such as presentation teams, backend development teams, database
teams, and so on). Because it is so widely known by most archi‐
tects, designers, and developers, the layered architecture is a natural
choice for most business application development efforts. However,
like all architecture styles, it has its strengths and weaknesses and is
not always suitable for some systems.
Description
Components within the layered architecture style are organized
into horizontal layers, each performing a specific role within the
application (such as presentation logic, business logic, persistence
logic, and so on). Although the number of layers may vary, most
layered architectures consist of four standard layers: presentation,
business, persistence, and database (see Figure 3-1). In some cases,
the business layer and persistence layer are combined into a single
business layer, particularly when the persistence logic (such as SQL)
is embedded within the business layer components. Thus, smaller
applications may have only three layers, whereas larger and more
complex business applications may contain five or more layers.
15
--- Page 20 ---
Figure 3-1. The layered architecture style is a technically partitioned
architecture
Each layer of the layered architecture style has a specific role and
responsibility within the application. For example, a presentation
layer is responsible for handling all user interface and browser
communication logic, whereas a business layer is responsible for
executing specific business rules associated with the request. Each
layer in the architecture forms an abstraction around the work
that needs to be done to satisfy a particular business request. For
example, the presentation layer doesn’t need to know about how to
get customer data; it only needs to display that information on a
screen in a particular format. Similarly, the business layer doesn’t
need to be concerned about how to format customer data for display
on a screen or even where the customer data is coming from; it only
needs to get the data from the persistence layer, perform business
logic against the data (e.g., calculate values or aggregate data), and
pass that information up to the presentation layer.
Layers are usually manifested through a namespace, package struc‐
ture, or directory structure (depending on the implementation lan‐
guage used). For example, customer functionality in a business
layer might be represented as app.business.customer, whereas in
the presentation layer, customer logic would be represented as app
.presentation.customer. In this example, the second node of the
namespace represents the layer, whereas the third node represents
16 | Chapter 3: Layered Architecture
--- Page 21 ---
the domain component. Notice, that the third node of the name‐
space (customer) is duplicated for all of the layers—this is indicative
of a technically partitioned architecture, where the domain is spread
across all layers of the architecture.
One of the powerful features of the layered architecture style is the
separation of concerns  among components. Components within a
specific layer deal only with logic that pertains to that layer. For
example, components in the presentation layer deal only with pre‐
sentation logic, whereas components residing in the business layer
deal only with business logic. This type of component classification
makes it easy to build effective roles and responsibility models
into your architecture, and makes it easy to develop, test, govern,
and maintain applications using this architecture style when well-
defined component interfaces and contracts are used between layers.
Key Concepts
In this architecture style, layers can be either open or closed. Notice
in Figure 3-2 that each layer in the architecture is marked as being
closed. A closed layer means that as a request moves from layer to
layer, it must go through the layer right below it to get to the next
layer below that one. For example, a request originating from the
presentation layer must first go through the business layer and then
to the persistence layer before finally hitting the database layer.
So why not allow the presentation layer direct access to either the
persistence layer or database layer? After all, direct database access
from the presentation layer is much faster than going through a
bunch of unnecessary layers just to retrieve or save database infor‐
mation. The answer to this question lies in a key concept known as
layers of isolation.
The layers of isolation concept means that changes made in one
layer of the architecture generally don’t impact or affect components
in other layers: the change is isolated to the components within that
layer, and possibly another associated layer (such as a persistence
layer containing SQL). If you allow the presentation layer direct
access to the persistence layer, then changes made to SQL within
the persistence layer would impact both the business layer and the
presentation layer, thereby producing a very tightly coupled applica‐
tion with lots of interdependencies between components. This type
Key Concepts | 17
--- Page 22 ---
of architecture then becomes brittle and very hard and expensive to
change.
Figure 3-2. With closed layers, the request must pass through that layer
The layers of isolation concept also means that each layer is inde‐
pendent of the other layers, thereby having little or no knowledge
of the inner workings of other layers in the architecture. To under‐
stand the power and importance of this concept, consider a large
refactoring effort to convert the presentation framework from the
angular.js framework to the react.js framework. Assuming that the
contracts (e.g., model) used between the presentation layer and the
business layer remain the same, the business layer is not affected by
the refactoring and remains completely independent of the type of
user interface framework used by the presentation layer. The same
is true with the persistence layer: if designed correctly, replacing a
relational database with a NoSQL database should only impact the
persistence layer, not the presentation or business layer.
While closed layers facilitate layers of isolation and therefore help
isolate change within the architecture, there are times when it makes
sense for certain layers to be open. For example, suppose you want
to add a shared services layer to an architecture containing common
service functionality accessed by components within the business
layer (e.g., data and string utility classes or auditing and logging
classes). Creating a services layer is usually a good idea in this case
18 | Chapter 3: Layered Architecture
--- Page 23 ---
because architecturally it restricts access to the shared services to the
business layer (and not the presentation layer). Without a separate
layer, there is nothing that architecturally restricts the presentation
layer from accessing these common services, making it difficult to
govern this access restriction.
In the shared services layer example, this layer would likely reside
below the business layer to indicate that components in this services
layer are not accessible from the presentation layer. However, this
presents a problem in that the business layer shouldn’t be required
to go through the services layer to get to the persistence layer. This
is an age-old problem with the layered architecture, and is solved by
creating open layers within the architecture.
As illustrated in Figure 3-3, the services layer in this case should be
marked as open, meaning requests are allowed to bypass this layer
and go directly to the layer below it. In the following example, since
the services layer is open, the business layer is allowed to bypass it
and go directly to the persistence layer, which makes perfect sense.
Figure 3-3. With open layers, the request can bypass the layer below it
Key Concepts | 19
--- Page 24 ---
Leveraging the concept of open and closed layers helps define the
relationship between architecture layers and request flows, and pro‐
vides designers and developers with the necessary information to
understand the various layer access restrictions within the architec‐
ture. Failure to document or properly communicate which layers in
the architecture are open and closed (and why) usually results in
tightly coupled and brittle architectures that are very difficult to test,
maintain, and deploy.
Examples
To illustrate how the layered architecture works, consider a request
from a business user to retrieve customer information for a particu‐
lar individual, as illustrated in Figure 3-4 . Notice the arrows show
the request flowing down to the database to retrieve the customer
data, and the response flowing back up to the screen to display the
data.
Figure 3-4. An example of the layered architecture
In this example, the customer information consists of both customer
data and order data (orders placed by the customer). Here, the cus‐
tomer screen is responsible for accepting the request and displaying
the customer information. It does not know where the data is, how
20 | Chapter 3: Layered Architecture
--- Page 25 ---
it is retrieved, or how many database tables must be queried to get
the data.
Once the customer screen receives a request to get customer infor‐
mation for a particular individual, it then forwards that request to
the customer delegate module in the presentation layer. This module
is responsible for knowing which modules in the business layer can
process that request, and also how to get to that module and what
data it needs (the contract). The customer object in the business layer
is responsible for aggregating all of the information needed by the
business request (in this case to get customer information).
Next, the customer object module invokes the customer DAO (data
access object) module in the persistence layer to get customer data,
and the order DAO module to get order information. These modules
in turn execute SQL statements to retrieve the corresponding data
and pass it back up to the customer object in the business layer.
Once the customer object receives the data, it aggregates the data
and passes that information back up to the customer delegate, which
then passes that data to the customer screen to be presented to the
user.
Considerations and Analysis
The layered architecture is a well-understood and general-purpose
architecture style, making it a good starting point for most applica‐
tions, particularly when you are not sure what architecture style
is best suited for your application. However, there are a couple of
things to consider from an architecture standpoint before choosing
this style.
The first thing to watch out for is what is known as the architec‐
ture sinkhole anti-pattern . This anti-pattern describes the situation
where requests flow through multiple layers of the architecture as
simple pass-through processing with little or no logic performed
within each layer. For example, assume that the presentation layer
responds to a request from the user to retrieve customer data. The
presentation layer passes the request to the business layer, which
simply passes the request to the persistence layer, which then makes
a simple SQL call to the database layer to retrieve the customer
data. The data is then passed all the way back up the stack with no
additional processing or logic to aggregate, calculate, or transform
the data.
Considerations and Analysis | 21
--- Page 26 ---
Every layered architecture will have at least some scenarios that fall
into the architecture sinkhole anti-pattern. The key, however, is to
analyze the percentage of requests that fall into this category. The
80-20 rule is usually a good practice to follow to determine whether
or not you are experiencing the architecture sinkhole anti-pattern.
It’s typical to have around 20 percent of the requests as simple
pass-through processing and 80 percent of the requests having some
business logic associated with them. However, if you find that this
ratio is reversed and a majority of your requests are simple pass-
through processing, you might want to consider making some of the
architecture layers open, keeping in mind that while it will be faster,
it will be more difficult to control change due to the lack of layer
isolation.
The layered architecture is still just as viable today as it was in the
old days when it was first introduced. While more modern analysis
and design approaches such as domain-driven design have given
developers and architects a way to think about a problem from
a domain perspective rather than a technical one, there are still
times when technically partitioned architectures (such as the layered
architecture) are more suitable.
When to Consider This Style
The layered architecture is good to consider if the project or initia‐
tive has significant budget or time constraints. Because the layered
architecture is generally considered a monolithic architecture style,
it does not have the complexities of a distributed architecture in
terms of remote access, contract management, and the complica‐
tions resulting from the fallacies of distributed computing described
in the previous chapter. Also, most developers and architects are
familiar with the layered architecture, making it easier to under‐
stand and implement.
Another reason to consider the layered architecture is when a
majority of your changes are isolated to specific layers within the
application. For example, changes isolated to only business rules
that don’t impact the user interface, changes involving only the user
interface look-and-feel, migration to a new user interface frame‐
work, and even migration to a new type of database are all isolated
to a specific layer in the architecture, making it easier to isolate the
components impacted by the change.
22 | Chapter 3: Layered Architecture
--- Page 27 ---
Because the layered architecture is a technically partitioned archi‐
tecture, it’s a good fit if the team structure is also technically
partitioned. In other words, if your overall team structure is organ‐
ized as teams of presentation (UI) developers, backend developers,
shared services teams, database teams, and so on, this aligns well
to the overall partitioning of this architecture style (presentation
layer, business layer, persistence layer, and so on). This alignment is
known as Conway’s Law.
When Not to Consider This Style
While there are good reasons to consider the layered architecture
as described in the prior section, unfortunately there are even more
reasons not to consider the layered architecture.
The first reason not to consider the layered architecture is if you
have high operational concerns  for your application—things like
scalability, elasticity, fault tolerance, and performance. Because lay‐
ered architectures lend themselves toward a monolithic architecture,
applications built using this architecture style are generally difficult
to scale. While the layered architecture can sometimes scale by split‐
ting the layers into separate physical deployments and/or creating
separate instances of the application in multiple virtual machines, it
becomes very expensive and inefficient because 100% of the applica‐
tion functionality must scale. In addition, the layered architecture is
not very fault-tolerant—a fatal crash in any part of the application
brings down the entire application functionality.
Another reason to avoid the layered architecture is when a major‐
ity of your changes are at a domain level  rather than a technical
one. Suppose you are tasked with adding an expiration date to the
customer’s “My Movie List” within a movie streaming application
(movies a customer has queued up to watch later). This new feature
would first require a change to the database schema, then a change
to the SQL in the persistence layer, then a change to the business
rules and contracts in the business layer (such as how long before
expiration, what to do when a movie in your list expires, and so
on), and finally a change to the presentation layer to display the
expiration date beside each movie in the list.
In analyzing this relatively simple change to the “My Movie List”
functionality, notice how every layer of the architecture is impacted
and requires change. In large systems with technically partitioned
Considerations and Analysis | 23
--- Page 28 ---
teams, this might even involve the coordination of multiple teams
(the UI team, backend team, database team, and so on) to make this
change. This not only impacts overall agility (the ability to respond
quickly to change), but also impacts the overall time and effort
involved in making this change.
Lastly, if your overall team structure is organized by cross-functional
domain-based teams (single teams that have UI, backend, and
database expertise focused on a particular domain within the appli‐
cation), the layered architecture is not a good fit because the tech‐
nically partitioned architecture structure is not aligned with the
domain partitioned team structure.
Architecture Characteristics
The chart illustrated in Figure 3-5 summarizes the overall capabili‐
ties (architecture characteristics) of the layered architecture in terms
of star ratings. One star means the architecture characteristic is not
well supported, whereas five stars means it’s well suited for that
particular architecture characteristic.
Figure 3-5. Architecture characteristics star ratings for the layered
architecture
24 | Chapter 3: Layered Architecture
