--- Page 29 ---
CHAPTER 4
Microkernel Architecture
The microkernel architecture style is a flexible and extensible archi‐
tecture that allows a developer or end user to easily add additional
functionality and features to an existing application in the form of
extensions, or “plug-ins, ” without impacting the core functionality
of the system. For this reason, the microkernel architecture is some‐
times referred to as a “plug-in architecture” (another common name
for this architecture style). This architecture style is a natural fit for
product-based applications (ones that are packaged and made avail‐
able for download in versions as a typical third-party product), but
is also common for custom internal business applications. In fact,
many operating systems implement the microkernel architecture
style, hence the origin of this style’s name.
Topology
The microkernel architecture style consists of two types of architec‐
ture components: a core system  and plug-in modules . Application
logic is divided between independent plug-in modules and the
basic core system, providing extensibility, flexibility, and isolation
of application features and custom processing logic. Figure 4-1 illus‐
trates the basic topology of the microkernel architecture style.
The core system of this architecture style can vary significantly in
terms of the functionality it provides. Traditionally, the core system
contains only the minimal functionality required to make the sys‐
tem operational (such as the case with older IDEs such as Eclipse),
but it can also be more full featured (such as with web browsers
25
--- Page 30 ---
like Chrome). In either case, the functionality in the core system can
then be extended through the use of separate plug-in modules.
Figure 4-1. Microkernel architecture style
Plug-in modules are standalone, independent components that con‐
tain specialized processing, additional features, adapter logic, or
custom code that is meant to enhance or extend the core system
to provide additional business capabilities. Generally, plug-in mod‐
ules should be independent of other plug-in modules and not be
dependent on other plug-ins to function. It’s also important in this
architecture style to keep communication between plug-ins to a
minimum to avoid confusing dependency issues.
The core system needs to know which plug-in modules are available
and how to get to them. One common way of implementing this
is through a plug-in registry. The registry contains information
about each plug-in module, including its name, contract details,
and remote access protocol details (depending on how the plug-in
is connected to the core system). For example, a plug-in for tax
software that flags items as a high risk for triggering an audit might
have a registry entry that contains the name of the service (Audi‐
tChecker), the contract details (input data and output data), and
the contract format (XML). In cases where the contracts and access
protocol are standard within the system, the registry might only
contain the name of the plug-in module and an interface name for
how to invoke that plug-in.
Plug-in modules can be connected to the core system in a variety of
ways. Traditionally, plug-ins are implemented as separate libraries or
modules (such as JAR and DLL files) connected in a point-to-point
fashion (such as a method call via an interface). These separate
modules can then be managed through frameworks such as OSGi
26 | Chapter 4: Microkernel Architecture
--- Page 31 ---
(Open Service Gateway Initiative), Java Modularity, Jigsaw, Penrose,
and Prism or .NET environments. When plug-ins are deployed in
this manner, the overall deployment model is that of a monolithic
(single deployment) architecture. Techniques such as dropping a
file in a particular directory and restarting the application are com‐
mon for the microkernel architecture when using point-to-point
plug-ins. Some applications using the previously listed frameworks
can also support runtime plug-in capabilities for adding or changing
plug-ins without having to restart the core system.
Alternatively, plug-ins can also be implemented as part of a single
consolidated codebase, manifested simply through a namespace or
package structure. For example, a plug-in that might perform an
assessment of a specific electronic device (such as an iPhone 12)
for an electronics recycling application might have the namespace
app.plugin.assessment.iphone12. Notice that the second node of
this namespace specifies that this code is a plug-in, specifically for
the assessment of an iPhone 12 device. In this manner, the code in
the plug-in is separate from the code in the core system.
Plug-in modules can also be implemented as remote services, and
accessed through REST or messaging interfaces from the core sys‐
tem. In this case, the microkernel architecture would be consid‐
ered a distributed architecture. All requests would still need to go
through the core system to reach the plug-in modules, but this type
of configuration allows for easier runtime deployment of the plug-in
components, and possibly better internal scalability and responsive‐
ness if multiple plug-ins need to be invoked for a single business
request.
Examples
A classic example of the microkernel architecture is the Eclipse
IDE. Downloading the basic Eclipse product provides you little
more than a fancy editor. However, once you start adding plug-ins,
it becomes a highly customizable and useful product for software
development. Internet browsers are another common example using
the microkernel architecture: viewers and other plug-ins add addi‐
tional capabilities that are not otherwise found in the basic browser
(the core system). As a matter of fact, many of the developer and
deployment pipeline tools and products such as PMD, Jira, Jenkins,
and so on are implemented using microkernel architecture.
Examples | 27
--- Page 32 ---
The examples are endless for product-based software, but what
about the use of the microkernel architecture for small and large
business applications? The microkernel architecture applies to these
situations as well. Tax software, electronics recycling, and even
insurance applications can benefit from this architecture style.
To illustrate this point, consider claims processing in a typical insur‐
ance company (filing a claim for an accident, fire, natural disaster,
and so on). This software functionality is typically very complicated.
Each jurisdiction (for example, a state in the United States) has
different rules and regulations for what is and isn’t allowed in an
insurance claim. For example, some jurisdictions allow for a free
windshield replacement if your windshield is damaged by a rock,
whereas other jurisdictions do not. This creates an almost infinite
set of conditions for a standard claims process.
Not surprisingly, most insurance claims applications leverage large
and complex rules engines to handle much of this complexity. How‐
ever, these rules engines can grow into a complex big ball of mud
where changing one rule impacts other rules, or requires an army of
analysts, developers, and testers just to make a simple rule change.
Using the microkernel architecture style can mitigate many of these
issues.
For example, the stack of folders you see in Figure 4-2  represents
the core system for claims processing. It contains the basic business
logic required by the insurance company to process a claim (which
doesn’t change often), but contains no custom jurisdiction process‐
ing. Rather, plug-in modules contain the specific rules for each
jurisdiction. Here, the plug-in modules can be implemented using
custom source code or separate rules engine instances. Regardless of
the implementation, the key point is that jurisdiction-specific rules
and processing are separate from the core claims system and can be
added, removed, and changed with little or no effect on the rest of
the core system or other plug-in modules.
28 | Chapter 4: Microkernel Architecture
--- Page 33 ---
Figure 4-2. Microkernel architecture example of processing an
insurance claim
Considerations and Analysis
The microkernel architecture style is very flexible and can vary
greatly in granularity. This style can describe the overarching archi‐
tecture of a system, or it can be embedded and used as part of
another architecture style. For example, a particular event processor,
domain service, or even a microservice can be implemented using
the microkernel architecture style, even though other services are
implemented in other ways.
This architecture style provides great support for evolutionary
design and incremental development. Y ou can produce a minimal
core system that provides some of the primary functionality of a sys‐
tem, and as the system evolves incrementally, you can add features
and functionality without having to make significant changes to the
core system.
Depending on how this architecture style is implemented and used,
it can be considered as either a technically partitioned architecture
or a domain partitioned one. For example, using plug-ins to provide
adapter functionality or specific configurations would make it a
technically partitioned architecture, whereas using plug-ins to pro‐
vide additional extensions or additional functionality would make it
more of a domain partitioned architecture.
Considerations and Analysis | 29
--- Page 34 ---
When to Consider This Style
The microkernel architecture style is good to consider as a starting
point for a product-based application or custom application that
will have planned extensions. In particular, it is a good choice for
products where you will be releasing additional features over time or
you want control over which users get which features.
Microkernel architecture is also a good choice for applications or
products that have multiple configurations based on a particular cli‐
ent environment or deployment model. Plug-in modules can specify
different configurations and features specific to any particular envi‐
ronment. For example, an application that can be deployed on any
cloud environment might have a different set of plug-ins that act as
adapters to fit the specific services of that particular cloud vendor,
whereas the core system contains the primary functionality and
remains completely agnostic as to the actual cloud environment.
As with the layered architecture style, the microkernel architecture
style is relatively simple and cost-effective, and is a good choice if
you have tight budget and time constraints.
When Not to Consider This Style
All requests must go through the core system, regardless of whether
the plug-ins are remote or point-to-point invocations. Because of
this, the core system acts as the main bottleneck to this architecture,
and is not well suited for highly scalable and elastic systems. Simi‐
larly, overall fault tolerance is not good in this architecture style,
again due to the need for the core system as an entry point.
One of the goals of the microkernel architecture is to reduce change
in the core system and push extended functionality and code volatil‐
ity out to the plug-in modules, which are more self-contained and
easier to test and change. Therefore, if you find that most of your
changes are within the core system and you are not leveraging the
power of plug-ins to contain additional functionality, this is likely
not a good architecture match for the problem you are trying to
solve.
30 | Chapter 4: Microkernel Architecture
--- Page 35 ---
Architecture Characteristics
The chart illustrated in Figure 4-3 summarizes the overall capabili‐
ties (architecture characteristics) of the microkernel architecture in
terms of star ratings. One star means the architecture characteristic
is not well supported, whereas five stars means it’s well suited for
that particular architecture characteristic.
Figure 4-3. Architecture characteristics star ratings for the microkernel
architecture
Considerations and Analysis | 31
--- Page 36 ---

