--- Page 37 ---
CHAPTER 5
Event-Driven Architecture
The event-driven architecture style has significantly gained in popu‐
larity and use over recent years, so much so that even the way we
think about it has changed. This high adoption rate isn’t overly
surprising given some of the hard problems event-driven archi‐
tecture solves, such as complex nondeterministic workflows and
highly reactive and responsive systems. Furthermore, new techni‐
ques, tools, frameworks, and cloud-based services have made event-
driven architecture more accessible and feasible than ever before,
and many teams are turning to event-driven architecture to solve
their complex business problems.
Topology
Event-driven architecture is an architecture style that relies on asyn‐
chronous processing using highly decoupled event processors that
trigger events and correspondingly respond to events happening in
the system. Most event-driven architectures consist of the following
architectural components: an event processor, an initiative event, a
processing event, and an event channel. These components and their
relationships are illustrated in Figure 5-1.
33
--- Page 38 ---
Figure 5-1. The main components of event-driven architecture
An event processor  (today usually called a service) is the main
deployment unit in event-driven architecture. It can vary in gran‐
ularity from a single-purpose function (such as validating an order)
to a large, complex process (such as executing or settling a finan‐
cial trade). Event processors can trigger asynchronous events, and
respond to asynchronous events being triggered. In most cases, an
event processor does both.
An initiating event usually comes from outside the main system and
kicks off some sort of asynchronous workflow or process. Examples
of initiating events are placing an order, buying some Apple stock,
bidding on a particular item in an auction, filing an insurance claim
for an accident, and so on. In most cases, initiating events are
received by only one service that then starts the chain of events to
process the initiating event, but this doesn’t have to be the case. For
example, placing a bid on an item in an online auction (an initiating
event) may be picked up by a Bid Capture service as well as a Bid
Tracker service.
A processing event (today usually referred to as a derived event) is
generated when the state of some service changes and that service
advertises to the rest of the system what that state change was. The
relationship between an initiating event and a processing event is
one-to-many—a single initiating event typically spawns many differ‐
ent internal processing events. For example, through the course of
34 | Chapter 5: Event-Driven Architecture
--- Page 39 ---
a workflow, a Place Order initiating event may result in an Order
Placed processing event, a Payment Applied  processing event, a
Inventory Updated  processing event, and so on. Notice how an
initiating event is usually in noun-verb format, whereas a processing
event is usually in verb-noun format.
The event channel is the physical messaging artifact (such as a queue
or topic) that is used to store triggered events and deliver those trig‐
gered events to a service that responds to those events. In most cases
initiating events use a point-to-point channel using queues or mes‐
saging services, whereas processing events generally use publish-and
subscribe channels using topics or notification services.
Example Architecture
To see how all of these components work together in a complete
event-driven architecture, consider the example illustrated in Fig‐
ure 5-2 where a customer wants to order a copy of Fundamentals of
Software Architecture by Mark Richards and Neal Ford (O’Reilly). In
this case, the initiating event would be Place Order. This initiating
event is received by the Order Placement service, which then places
the order for the book. The Order Placement service in turn adver‐
tises what it did to the rest of the system through a Order Placed
processing event.
Notice in this example that when the Order Placement service trig‐
gers the Order Placed event, it doesn’t know which other services
(if any) respond to this event. This illustrates the highly decoupled,
nondeterministic nature of event-driven architecture.
Continuing with the example, notice in Figure 5-2  that three dif‐
ferent services respond to the Order Placed  event: the Payment
service, the Inventory Management service, and the Notification
service. These services perform their corresponding business func‐
tions, and in turn advertise what they did to the rest of the system
through other processing events.
Example Architecture | 35
--- Page 40 ---
Figure 5-2. Processing a book order using event-driven architecture
One thing in particular to notice about this example is how the Noti
fication service advertises what it did by generating a Notified
Customer processing event, but no other service cares about or
responds to this event. So why then trigger an event that no one
cares about? The answer is architectural extensibility. By triggering
an event, the Notification service provides a hook that future
services can respond to (such as a notification tracking service),
without having to make any other modifications to the system.
Thus, a good rule of thumb with event-driven architecture is to
always have services advertise their state changes (what action they
took), regardless if other services respond to that event. If no other
services care about the event, then the event simply disappears from
the topic (or is saved for future processing, depending on the mes‐
saging technology used).
36 | Chapter 5: Event-Driven Architecture
--- Page 41 ---
Event-Driven Versus Message-Driven
Is there a difference between an event-driven system and a message-
driven system? It turns out there is, and although subtle, it’s an
important difference to know and understand. Event-driven systems
process events, whereas message-driven systems process messages.
The first difference has to do with the context of what you are
sending to the rest of the system. An event is telling others about
a state change or something you did. Examples of an event include
things like “I just placed an order, ” or “I just submitted a bid for an
item. ” A message, on the other hand, is a command or request to a
specific service. Examples of a message include things like “apply a
payment to this order, ” “ship this item to this address, ” or “give me
the customer’s email address. ” Notice the difference here—with an
event, the service triggering the event has no idea which services (or
how many) will respond, whereas a message is usually directed to a
single known service (for example, Payment).
Another difference between an event and a message is the owner‐
ship of the event channel. With events, the sender owns the event
channel, whereas with messages, the receiver owns the channel. This
ownership becomes more significant when you consider the contract
of the event or message. Consider the example in Figure 5-3 where
the Order Placement service is sending out a Order Placed event
that is responded to by the Payment service. In this case, the sender
(Order Placement) owns both the event channel and the contract.
In other words, contract changes would be initiated by the Order
Placement service, and the Payment service and all other services
responding to that event would have to conform and adapt to these
changes.
Figure 5-3. With events, the sender owns the event channel and
contract
Event-Driven Versus Message-Driven | 37
--- Page 42 ---
However, with messages in a message-driven system, it’s exactly the
opposite—the receiver owns the message channel. As illustrated
in Figure 5-4 , the Order Placement  service is telling the Payment
service to apply the payment in the form of a command. In this
case, the Payment service owns the message channel (queue) as well
as the message contract. Notice that with message-based processing,
the Order Placement  service would need to conform to contract
changes initiated by the Payment service.
Figure 5-4. With messages, the receiver owns the message channel and
contract
The type of event channel artifact is also a distinguishing fac‐
tor between event-driven systems and message-driven systems.
Typically, event-driven systems use publish-and-subscribe messag‐
ing using topics or notification services when triggering events,
whereas message-driven systems typically use point-to-point mes‐
saging using queues or messaging services when sending messages.
That’s not to say event-driven systems can’t use point-to-point mes‐
saging—in some cases point-to-point messaging is necessary to
retrieve specific information from another service or to control the
order or timing of events in a system.
Considerations and Analysis
Because of the asynchronous and decoupled nature of event-driven
architecture, it excels in areas of fault tolerance, scalability, and high
performance. It also provides for excellent extensibility when adding
additional features and functionality. However, while these charac‐
teristics are very attractive, especially for today’s complex systems,
there are plenty of reasons not to use event-driven architecture. The
following two sections outline the reasons to consider event-driven
architecture, and more importantly, when to be cautious about
using it.
38 | Chapter 5: Event-Driven Architecture
--- Page 43 ---
When to Consider This Style
Simply put, event-driven architecture is the architecture of choice
for systems that require high performance, high scalability, and high
levels of fault tolerance. However, there are other reasons to con‐
sider this architecture style beyond these architecture characteristic
superpowers.
If the nature of your business processing is reacting to things that
are happening in and around the system (rather than responding to
a user request), then this is a good architecture style to consider. Lis‐
ten to your business stakeholders—are they using words like “event, ”
“triggers, ” and “react to something happening”? If so, then there’s a
good chance your business problem matches this architecture style.
Also, ask yourself—am I responding to a user request, or reacting
to something the user did? These are great questions to qualify
whether the business problem matches this architecture style.
Event-driven architecture is also a good choice when you have
complex, nondeterministic workflows that are difficult to model.
For decades developers have been building complex decision trees
trying to outline every possible outcome of a complex workflow,
only to continually fail at this fool’s errand. Systems such as these are
sometimes classified as CEP (complex event processing), something
that is managed natively in event-driven architecture.
When Not to Consider This Style
Y ou should not consider this architecture style if most of your
processing is request based. Request-based processing is the typical
situation where a user is requesting data from the database (such as
a customer profile) or doing basic CRUD operations (create, read,
update, delete) on entities in the system. Furthermore, if most of
your processing requires synchronous processing where the user
must wait for processing to be complete for a particular request,
event-driven architecture is likely not the right architecture style for
you.
Because all processing is eventually consistent in event-driven archi‐
tecture, this is not a good architecture style for business problems
that require high levels of data consistency. There is little or no
guarantee of when processing will occur in an event-driven architec‐
ture, so if you are expecting certain data to be there at a certain
Considerations and Analysis | 39
--- Page 44 ---
time, look elsewhere for an architecture style, like service-based, that
helps preserve data consistency.
Another reason to walk away from event-driven architecture and
consider a different architecture style is when you need control over
the workflow and timing of events. Both of these are extremely
difficult to manage when doing asynchronous event processing.
For example, imagine the nightmare of coordinating the following
scenario: Event A  and Event B  must complete processing before
Event C can be triggered, and Event D and Event E must wait for
Event C to finish, but Event D must start processing before Event
E. Good luck managing that mess—you’re better off using orchestra‐
ted service-oriented architecture or orchestrated microservices for
that type of complex coordination.
Error handling is another complexity that causes teams to shy away
from event-driven architecture. Because there is usually no central
workflow orchestrator or controller in event-driven architecture,
when errors occur in a service, it’s up to that service to try to
repair the error. Furthermore, because everything is asynchronous,
other actions may have occurred in the workflow for that event.
For example, suppose an Order Placement service triggers an Order
Placed event for a book that a customer ordered. The Notification
service, Payment service, and Inventory service all respond to the
event at the same time. However, suppose the Notification and
Payment services both respond and complete their processing, but
the Inventory service throws an error because there are no more
books left when the event is received. Now what? The customer
has already been notified and their credit card has been charged,
but there are no more books left to ship to the customer. Should
payment be reversed? Should another notification be sent to the
customer? Should processing just wait until there’s more inventory?
And which service performs all this error handling logic? Error
handing is indeed one of the more complex aspects of event-driven
architecture.
40 | Chapter 5: Event-Driven Architecture
--- Page 45 ---
Architecture Characteristics
The chart illustrated in Figure 5-5 summarizes the overall capabil‐
ities (architecture characteristics) of event-driven architecture in
terms of star ratings. One star means the architecture characteristic
is not well supported, whereas five stars means it’s well suited for
that particular architecture characteristic.
Figure 5-5. Architecture characteristics star ratings for event-driven
architecture
Considerations and Analysis | 41
--- Page 46 ---

