--- Page 47 ---
CHAPTER 6
Microservices Architecture
Perhaps the biggest change in architecture since 2012 is the intro‐
duction of microservices. This trend-setting architecture style took
the world by storm, similar to what service-oriented architecture
(SOA) did back in 2006. Over the years we’ve learned a lot about
this revolutionary (and evolutionary) architecture style and how it
addresses many of the complex problems we face in developing soft‐
ware solutions. New tools, techniques, frameworks, and platforms
have come about over the years that make microservices easier to
design, implement, and manage. That said, microservices is perhaps
one of the most complicated architecture styles to get right.
Basic Topology
The microservices architecture style is an ecosystem made up of
single-purpose, separately deployed services that are accessed typ‐
ically through an API gateway. Client requests originating from
either a user interface (usually a microfrontend) or an external
request invoke well-defined endpoints in an API gateway, which
then forwards the user request to separately deployed services. Each
service in turn accesses its own data, or makes requests to other
services to access data the service doesn’t own. The basic topology
for the microservices architecture style is illustrated in Figure 6-1.
43
--- Page 48 ---
Figure 6-1. The basic topology of the microservices architecture style
Notice that although Figure 6-1 shows each service associated with
a separate database, this does not have to be the case (and usually
isn’t). Rather, each service owns its own collection of tables, usually
in the form of a schema that can be housed in a single highly avail‐
able database or a single database devoted to a particular domain.
The key concept to understand here is that only the service owning
the tables can access and update that data. If other services need
access to that data, they must ask the owning microservice for that
information rather than accessing the tables directly. The reason‐
ing behind this data ownership approach is described in detail in
“Bounded Context” on page 45.
The primary job of the API gateway in microservices is to hide
the location and implementation of the corresponding services that
correspond to the API gateway endpoints. However, the API gate‐
way can also perform cross-cutting infrastructure-related functions,
such as security, metrics gathering, request-ID generation, and so
on. Notice that unlike the enterprise service bus (ESB) in service-
oriented architecture, the API gateway in microservices does not
contain any business logic, nor does it perform any orchestration or
44 | Chapter 6: Microservices Architecture
--- Page 49 ---
mediation. This is critical within microservices in order to preserve
what is known as a bounded context (detailed further in a moment).
What Is a Microservice?
A microservice is defined as a single-purpose, separately deployed
unit of software that does one thing really, really well. In fact, this
is where the term “microservices” gets its name—not from the phys‐
ical size of the service (such as the number of classes), but rather
from what it does. Because microservices are meant to represent
single-purpose functions, they are generally fine-grained. However,
this doesn’t always have to be the case. Suppose a developer creates
a service consisting of 312 class files. Would you still consider that
service to be a microservice? In this example, the service actually
does only one thing really well—send emails to customers. Each of
the 300+ different emails that could be sent to a customer is repre‐
sented as a separate class file, hence the large number of classes.
However, because it does one thing really well (send an email to
a customer), this would in fact be consisted a microservice. This
example illustrates the point that its not about the size of the service,
but rather what the service does.
Because microservices tend to be single-purpose functions, it’s not
uncommon to have hundreds to even thousands of separately
deployed microservices in any given ecosystem or application con‐
text. The sheer number of separate services is what makes microser‐
vices so unique. Microservices can be deployed as containerized
services (such as Docker) or as serverless functions.
Bounded Context
As mentioned earlier, each service typically owns its own data,
meaning that the tables belonging to a particular service are only
accessed by that service. For example, a Wishlist service might own
its corresponding wishlist tables. If other services need wish list
data, those services would have to ask the Wishlist service for that
information rather than accessing the wishlist tables directly.
This concept is known as a bounded context, a term coined by Eric
Evans in his book Domain-Driven Design (Addison-Wesley). Within
the scope of microservices, this means that all of the source code
representing some domain or subdomain (such as a wish list for a
What Is a Microservice? | 45
--- Page 50 ---
customer), along with the corresponding data structures and data,
are all encapsulated as one unit, as illustrated in Figure 6-2.
Figure 6-2. A bounded context includes the source code and corre‐
sponding data for a given domain or subdomain
This concept is critical for microservices. As a matter of fact,
microservices as an architecture style wouldn’t exist without the
notion of a bounded context. To illustrate this point, imagine 250
microservices all accessing the same set of tables in a monolithic
database. Suppose you make a structural change (such as dropping
a column or table) that 120 of those services access. This change
would require the coordination of modifying, testing, and deploying
120 separate services at the same time, along with the database
change. This is a scenario that is simply not feasible.
Within microservices, the bounded context not only facilitates
architectural agility (the ability to respond quickly to change), but
also manages change control within a microservices ecosystem.
With the bounded context, only the service that owns the data
needs to change when structural data changes happen. As shown in
Figure 6-3 , other services requiring access to data within another
bounded context must ask for the data through a separate contract.
This contract is usually a different representation than that of the
physical database structure of the data, thereby usually not requiring
a change to other services or the contracts.
46 | Chapter 6: Microservices Architecture
--- Page 51 ---
Figure 6-3. The bounded context usually isolates changes to just the
service owning the data
Unique Features
Microservices stands apart from all other architecture styles. The
three things that make the microservices architecture style so
unique are distributed data, operational automation, and organiza‐
tional change.
Microservices is the only architecture style that requires data to be
broken up and distributed across separate services. The reason for
this need is the sheer number of services usually found within a
typical microservices architecture. Without aligning services with
their corresponding data within a strict bounded context, it simply
wouldn’t be feasible to make structural changes to the underlying
application data. Because other architecture styles don’t specify the
fine-grained, single-purpose nature of a service as microservices
does, those other architecture styles can usually get by with a single
monolithic database.
Although the practice of associating a service with its corresponding
data in a bounded context is one of the main goals of microservices,
rarely in the real world of business applications does this completely
happen. While a majority of services may be able to own their
own data, in many cases it’s sometimes necessary to share data
between two or more services. Use cases for sharing data between a
handful of services (two to six) range from table coupling, foreign
key constraints, triggers between tables, and materialized views, to
Unique Features | 47
--- Page 52 ---
performance optimizations for data access, to shared ownership of
tables between services. When data is shared between services, the
bounded context is extended to include all of the shared tables as
well as all of the services that access that data.
Operational automation is another unique feature that separates
microservices from all other architecture styles, again due to the
sheer number of microservices in a typical ecosystem. It is not
humanly possible to manage the parallel testing, deployment, and
monitoring of several hundred to several thousand separately
deployed units of software. For this reason, containerization is usu‐
ally required, along with service orchestration and management
platforms such as Kubernetes. This also leads to the requirement
of DevOps for microservices (rather than something that’s “nice
to have”). Because of the large number of services, it’s not feasible
to “hand off ” services to separate testing teams and release engi‐
neers. Rather, teams own services and the corresponding testing and
release of those services.
This leads to the third thing that distinguishes microservices from
all other architecture styles—organizational change. Microservices
is the only architecture style that requires development teams to
be organized into domain areas of cross-functional teams with spe‐
cialization (a single development team consisting of user interface,
backend, and database developers). This in turn requires the iden‐
tification of service owners (usually architects) within a particular
domain. Testers and release engineers, as well as DBAs (database
administrators), are also usually aligned with specific domain areas
so that they are part of the same virtual team as the developers.
In this manner, these “virtual teams” test and release their own
services.
Examples and Use Cases
Applications that are well suited for the microservices architecture
style include those that consist of separate and distinct functions
within a business workflow. A classic example of this is a standard
retail-based order entry system. Placing an order, applying a pay‐
ment, notifying a customer, managing inventory, fulfilling the order,
shipping the order, tracking the order, sending out surveys, and data
analytics are all separate and distinct functions that work well as
separately deployed microservices.
48 | Chapter 6: Microservices Architecture
--- Page 53 ---
Another interesting use case for microservices is that of business
intelligence and analytics reporting. Each report, query, data feed,
or data analytics can be developed as a separate microservice, all
accessing data within a data lake or data warehouse. Although with
the reporting use case there isn’t a strict bounded context with the
data, this still works as microservices because the underlying schema
structure of a data lake or data warehouse rarely encounters break‐
ing changes. Rather, older schemas are deprecated and new ones are
created to replace them, helping manage the change control issues
usually found with typical microservices architectures operating on
transactional data.
Considerations and Analysis
While microservices is very popular and powerful, it is also perhaps
the hardest architecture style to get right. Service granularity (the
size of a service) is one of the first hard parts of microservices most
teams encounter. Single responsibility principle is unfortunately
highly subjective, making it difficult to gain consensus on the granu‐
larity of a service. For example, is a notification service that sends
out emails and SMS texts single purpose, or is notifying a customer
via email single purpose? Other factors, such as code volatility, fault
tolerance, scalability and throughput, and access control, are more
objective ways of justifying service granularity.
Another hard part of the microservices architecture style is how
services should communicate with each other. Should they use asyn‐
chronous communication or synchronous communication? Should
you use orchestration for your workflows between services using an
orchestration service to act as a mediator, or choreography where
services directly talk to one another? Each of these communication
choices has numerous trade-offs, making it even more difficult to
answer these questions.
Data is yet another hard part of microservices. If a Wishlist ser‐
vice needs product information from the Product Catalog service,
should it ask for the data through inter-service communication via
REST, cache the data it needs using an in-memory data grid, expand
the wishlist table schema to include the necessary product data
it needs, or simply share the product catalog data? Again, these
choices all have trade-offs, making it difficult to choose the most
appropriate option.
Considerations and Analysis | 49
--- Page 54 ---
There are many more hard parts about microservices, including
distributed transaction management, contracts, code reuse techni‐
ques, migration patterns, and so on. Fortunately, all of these hard
parts and their corresponding trade-offs are addressed in detail in
the book Software Architecture: The Hard Parts  by Neal Ford et al.
(O’Reilly).
When to Consider This Style
One of the first considerations in choosing microservices is to take
a detailed look at your application functionality. Is it feasible to
break apart your application functionality into dozens or hundreds
of separate and distinct pieces of functionality that are independent
from each other? If so, then this is a good architecture to consider as
this is exactly the shape of microservices.
Applications that require high levels of agility (the ability to respond
quickly to change) are well suited for the microservices architec‐
ture style. From a maintainability standpoint, the bounded context
ensures that subdomain functionality and its corresponding data are
bound together, making it easy to locate and make coding changes.
Testing is easier because the testing scope is usually reduced to a
single-purpose service, and as such it’s easier to achieve full regres‐
sion testing. Deployment risk is significantly reduced because what
is usually deployed is only a single service. In most cases this can be
done through a hot deploy in the middle of the day as opposed to
big-bang deployments over a weekend.
Microservices is also a good architecture style to consider if you
have high fault tolerance and high scalability needs. Scalability and
fault tolerance are both at the function level in microservices, and
because mean time to start (MTTS) and mean time to recovery
(MTTR) are so low (usually measured in hundreds of milliseconds),
microservices is also good for elastic systems.
Y ou should also consider microservices if you have plans for lots
of extensibility in your existing architecture. Adding functionality
in microservices is sometimes simply a matter of creating a service,
wrapping it in a container, creating an API endpoint, and deploying
that service. I like to call this technique “drop-in” functionality. In
other words, if you need to add additional features or functionality
to your system, just create a service and drop it into your ecosystem.
50 | Chapter 6: Microservices Architecture
--- Page 55 ---
Sounds easy, right? Well, in theory it is, but there are lots of reasons
not to use microservices, which are outlined in the next section.
When Not to Consider This Style
While microservices has lots of benefits and superpowers, there are
definitely reasons to avoid this architecture style and consider others
instead. The first of these considerations is the nature of your work‐
flows. Microservices is all about single-purpose, separately deployed
pieces of software that collectively make up an application. However,
if you find that all of that separately deployed functionality needs
to be tied together with complex workflows and lots of inter-service
communication or orchestration, then this is not an architecture
you should consider.
Perhaps one of the biggest factors for not considering microservices
relates to data. If your data is tightly coupled and monolithic in
nature (meaning it’s not feasible to break apart your data into several
dozen to several hundred separate schemas or databases), then run
away in the opposite direction of microservices. By tightly coupled,
I mean the data is so interrelated with the functionality that while
you can break apart the functionality of an application into multiple
deployment units, those separate deployment units all need access
to the same data. Furthermore, data can be highly coupled in the
form of foreign key constraints, triggers, views, and even stored
procedures (yes, believe it or not, they still exist in the real world).
If your data is too tightly coupled together, consider something like
service-based architecture instead of microservices.
Despite what some articles and blogs say, microservices is perhaps
the most complex architecture style that exists today. Consequently,
it is also very expensive. Licensing fees for platforms, products,
frameworks, and databases all rise exponentially based on the large
number of services in a typical microservices ecosystem. Therefore,
if you have tight cost and time constraints, avoid this architecture
style and select a hybrid such as service-based architecture.
Interestingly enough, most microservices architectures do not
lend themselves well to high-performance or highly responsive
systems. While this may sound surprising, it’s because in reality,
microservices do in fact tend to communicate with each other to
access data and perform additional business functions. Because the
Considerations and Analysis | 51
--- Page 56 ---
communication between services is remote, three types of latency
occur: network latency, security latency, and data latency.
Network latency is the amount of time it takes packets of informa‐
tion to reach the target service over the network. Depending on
the type of remote access protocol you are using and the physical
distance between services, this can range anywhere from 30 ms to
300 ms or more.
Security latency is the amount of time it takes to authenticate or
authorize the request to the remote endpoint. Depending on the
level of security and access control on the remote service endpoint,
this latency can range anywhere from a few milliseconds to 300 ms
or more.
Data latency impacts the performance aspects of microservices the
most. Data latency is the amount of time it takes for other services
to query data on your behalf that you don’t own. For example, sup‐
pose the Wishlist service needs to access the product descriptions,
and communicates with the Product Catalog service to request the
data. The Product Catalog  service, upon receiving the request,
must make an additional database call to retrieve the product
descriptions. This is something that doesn’t happen when data is
shared in monolithic databases, where a single database call using an
inner or outer join is the only thing required to access multiple types
of data.
Architecture Characteristics
The chart illustrated in Figure 6-4 summarizes the overall capabil‐
ities (architecture characteristics) of microservices architecture in
terms of star ratings. One star means the architecture characteristic
is not well supported, whereas five stars means it’s well suited for
that particular architecture characteristic.
52 | Chapter 6: Microservices Architecture
--- Page 57 ---
Figure 6-4. Architecture characteristics star ratings for microservices
architecture
Considerations and Analysis | 53
--- Page 58 ---

