--- Page 59 ---
CHAPTER 7
Space-Based Architecture
Most web-based business applications follow the same general
request flow: a request from a web browser is received by a web
server, then an application server, then finally a database server.
While this type of request flow works great for a small number of
users, bottlenecks start appearing as the user load increases, first
at the web server, then at the application server, and finally at the
database.
The usual response to bottlenecks based on an increase in user
load is to scale out the web servers. This is relatively easy and inex‐
pensive, and sometimes works to address some bottleneck issues.
However, in most cases of high user load, scaling out the web servers
just moves the bottleneck down to the application servers. Scaling
application servers can be more complex and expensive than web
servers, and usually just moves the bottleneck down to the database,
which is even more difficult and expensive to scale. Even if you
can scale the database, what you eventually end up with is a triangle-
shaped topology shown in Figure 7-1 , with the widest part of the
triangle being the web servers (easiest to scale) and the smallest part
being the database (hardest to scale).
55
--- Page 60 ---
Figure 7-1. The database is usually the ultimate bottleneck for highly
scalable systems
In any high-volume application with an extremely large concurrent
user load, the database will usually be the final limiting factor in
how many transactions you can process concurrently. While various
caching technologies and database scaling and sharding products
help to address these issues, the fact remains that scaling out an
application for extreme loads is a very difficult proposition when it
comes to the database.
The space-based architecture style is specifically designed to address
and solve these sorts of high scalability and concurrency issues. It is
also a useful architecture style for applications that have variable and
unpredictable concurrent user volumes (known as elastic systems).
Solving extreme and variable scalability needs is exactly what space-
based architecture is all about.
Topology and Components
The space-based architecture style addresses the limitations of appli‐
cation scaling by removing the database from the transactional pro‐
cessing of the system—hence the name space-based architecture.
This style gets its name from the computer science term tuple space,
56 | Chapter 7: Space-Based Architecture
--- Page 61 ---
the concept of multiple parallel processors with shared memory.
High scalability is achieved by removing the database constraint
and replacing the database with replicated in-memory data grids
during transactional processing. Application data is kept in memory
and replicated among all the active processing units, and synchron‐
ized with a background database asynchronously using data pumps
(more on that in the following section).
Processing units can be dynamically started up and shut down as
user load increases and decreases, thereby addressing variable scala‐
bility. Because there is no database involved in the transactional pro‐
cessing of the system, the database bottleneck is therefore removed,
providing near-infinite scalability within the application. Figure 7-2
illustrates the topology of the space-based architecture style.
Figure 7-2. The space-based architecture style
Services in this architecture style are formally referred to as pro‐
cessing units . A processing unit (illustrated in Figure 7-3 ) con‐
tains the business functionality and varies in granularity from
a single-purpose function to the entire application functional‐
ity. Each processing unit includes business logic, an in-memory
data grid containing transactional data, and optionally, web-based
Topology and Components | 57
--- Page 62 ---
components. Processing units may also communicate with each
other directly or through the processing grid of the virtualized mid‐
dleware (described in the following section).
Figure 7-3. The processing unit contains the application functionality
and an in-memory data grid
The complexity associated with this architecture style is managed
through what is called virtualized middleware . This middleware
manages such things as request and session management, data syn‐
chronization, communication and orchestration between processing
units, and the dynamic tearing down and starting up of processing
units to manage elasticity and user load. The four main architecture
components contained in the virtualized middleware are the mes‐
saging grid, the data grid, the processing grid, and the deployment
manager.
The messaging grid manages input request and session information.
When a request comes into the virtualized middleware component,
the messaging grid component determines which active processing
units are available to receive the request and forwards the request to
one of them. The complexity of the messaging grid can range from
a simple round-robin algorithm to a more complex next-available
algorithm that keeps track of which request is being processed by
which processing unit. Typically, the messaging grid is implemented
through a traditional web server.
58 | Chapter 7: Space-Based Architecture
--- Page 63 ---
The data grid  component is perhaps the most important and
crucial component in this style. The data grid interacts with the
data-replication engine in each processing unit to manage the data
replication between processing units when data updates occur. Since
the messaging grid can forward a request to any of the processing
units available, it is essential that each processing unit contains
exactly the same data in its in-memory data grid as other processing
units. The data grid is typically implemented through caching prod‐
ucts such as Hazelcast, Apache Ignite, and Oracle Coherence, which
manage the synchronization and replication of the data grids. This
synchronization typically occurs asynchronously behind the scenes
as updates occur in the in-memory data grids.
An additional element of the data grid is a data pump that asyn‐
chronously sends the updates to a database. A data pump can be
implemented in a number of ways, but is typically managed through
persistent queues using messaging or streaming. Components called
data writers  asynchronously listen for these updates, and in turn,
update the database. Data writers can be implemented in a number
of ways, varying in granularity from application-level custom data
writers or data hubs to dedicated data writers for each processing
unit type.
In the event of a cold start due to a system crash or a deploy‐
ment, data readers  are used, leveraging a reverse data pump to
retrieve data from the database and pump the data to a processing
unit. However, once at least one processing unit having the same
in-memory data grid is populated, additional processing units can
be started and populated without having to retrieve the data from
the database. Figure 7-4 illustrates the data grid containing the in-
memory data grids, data pumps, data writers, and data readers.
The processing grid  component of the virtualized middleware is
an optional component that manages distributed processing for
requests that require coordination or orchestration between pro‐
cessing unit types. Orchestration between multiple processing units
can be coordinated through the processing grid, or directly between
processing units in a choreographed fashion.
Topology and Components | 59
--- Page 64 ---
Figure 7-4. The data grid contains the in-memory data grid, data
pumps, and data writers
Finally, the deployment manager component manages the dynamic
startup and shutdown of processing units based on load conditions.
This component continually monitors response times and user
loads, starts up new processing units when the load increases, and
shuts down processing units when the load decreases. It is a critical
component to achieving variable scalability needs within an applica‐
tion, and is usually implemented through container orchestration
products such as Kubernetes.
Examples
Space-based architecture is a very complicated and specialized
architecture style, and is primarily used for high-volume, highly
elastic systems that require very fast performance.
One example of the use of space-based architecture is a concert tick‐
eting system. Imagine what happens when your favorite rock band
announces an opening show and tickets go on sale. Concurrency
goes from a few dozen people to tens of thousands of people within
a matter of seconds, with everyone wanting those same great seats
60 | Chapter 7: Space-Based Architecture
--- Page 65 ---
you want. Continuously reading and writing to a database simply
isn’t feasible with this kind of elastic system at such a high scale and
performance.
Another example of the kind of elastic systems that benefit from
space-based architecture is online auction and bidding systems. In
most cases, sellers have no idea how many people will be bidding,
and bidding always gets fast and furious toward the end of the
bidding process, significantly increasing the number of concurrent
requests. Once the bidding ends, requests go back down to a min‐
imum, and the whole process repeats again as bidding nears the
end—another good example of an elastic system.
High-volume social media sites are another good example where
space-based architecture is a good fit. How do you process hundreds
of thousands (or even millions) of posts, likes, dislikes, and respon‐
ses within a span of a few seconds? Clearly the database gets in
the way of this sort of volume (regardless of elastic behavior), and
removing the database from the transactional processing, as space-
based architecture does, and eventually persisting the data is one
possible solution to this complex problem.
Considerations and Analysis
Space-based architecture is a complex and expensive style to imple‐
ment. As such, it’s not suitable as a general-purpose architecture
like the others reviewed in this report. Rather, it’s meant for spe‐
cific situations such as high scalability, high elasticity, and high
performance.
A unique feature of space-based architecture is its deployment
model. The entire architecture can be solely cloud based, solely
on premises (on prem), or split between the two. This latter deploy‐
ment model is particularly effective for cloud-based data synchroni‐
zation where your main transactional processing is in the cloud, but
your data must remain on prem. In this model, the data writers and
data readers typically reside on prem alongside the database, and
asynchronous data pumps send data to the data writers from the
cloud-based processing units.
Space-based architecture is considered a technically partitioned
architecture because domain functionality is spread across numer‐
ous technical artifacts, including the processing units, in-memory
Considerations and Analysis | 61
--- Page 66 ---
data grids, data pumps, data writers, and data readers. A domain-
based change (particularly one involving a change to data) usually
impacts all of these artifacts.
When to Consider This Style
This architecture style is a great fit for those situations where you
have very high concurrent scalability or elasticity requirements. Pro‐
cessing tens of thousands of concurrent requests (or more) becomes
a big challenge when a database is involved, and this architecture
style removes the database from the scalability equation, providing
for near-infinite scalability.
Another use case to consider for this architecture style is those
systems that require very high performance and responsiveness.
Because this architecture style relies on in-memory caching, data
update and retrieval are usually measured in nanoseconds, which
provides the most responsive and high performance architecture
out of all the architecture styles reviewed in this report.
When Not to Consider This Style
Even if you have high scalability and elasticity needs, this archi‐
tecture may not be something you should consider if you have
large data volumes for your transactional processing. Because all
transactional data is stored in memory, the overall size of your
data becomes a limiting factor for space-based architecture. Imagine
trying to take a 45-terabyte relational database and trying to fit that
in memory!
Due to the technical complexity of this architecture style, it is not a
good fit if you have tight budget and time constraints. Furthermore,
achieving very high user loads in a test environment is both expen‐
sive and time consuming, making it difficult to test the scalability
aspects of the application. Because of this, overall agility (the ability
to respond quickly to change) is fairly low in this architecture style.
Because space-based architecture is always eventually consistent, it
may take a lot of time before updates made in the in-memory data
grids reach the database. As such, space-based architecture should
not be considered for those systems that require high levels of data
consistency between data sources.
62 | Chapter 7: Space-Based Architecture
--- Page 67 ---
Architecture Characteristics
The chart illustrated in Figure 7-5  summarizes the overall capa‐
bilities (architecture characteristics) of space-based architecture in
terms of star ratings. One star means the architecture characteristic
is not well supported, whereas five stars means it’s well suited for
that particular architecture characteristic.
Figure 7-5. Architecture characteristics star ratings for space-based
architecture
Considerations and Analysis | 63
--- Page 68 ---

